README.md, before:

# OpenTofu Hello World on AWS

## Goal

A minimal guide on how to use OpenTofu to provision an EC2 instance on AWS.

## **Set up AWS**

### **AWS CLI**

In your local machine install AWS CLI, my [guide](https://github.com/francisco-camargo/francisco-camargo/blob/master/src/aws/aws_cli/README.md).

Verify with

```bash
aws --version
```

### **IAM Identity Center**

#### Step 1: Complete Identity Center Setup

1. **Enable IAM Identity Center** in your AWS Console
2. **Choose your identity source** - for a personal account, select "Identity Center directory"
3. **Complete any remaining setup steps** AWS shows you

#### Step 2: Create Your User

1. **In Identity Center, go to "Users"** in the left sidebar
2. **Click "Add user"**
3. **Fill in your details**:

    - Username (your choice)
    - Email address
    - First/Last name
    - Set a password or have AWS generate one

4. **Create the user**

#### Step 3: Create a Permission Set

1. **Go to "Permission sets"** in the left sidebar
2. **Click "Create permission set"**
3. **Select permission set type** select "Custom permission set"
4. **Add inline policy**:

   - In the "Permissions" section, locate "Inline policy"
   - Click "Add inline policy"
   - Switch to JSON editor and paste (_you must remove the comments_):

   ```json
   {
     "Version": "2012-10-17",
     "Statement": [
       {
         "Effect": "Allow",
         "Action": [
           "ec2:*",             // For managing EC2 instances
           "elasticloadbalancing:*",  // For potential load balancing
           "iam:CreateServiceLinkedRole",  // For EC2 service roles
           "iam:PassRole",      // For assigning roles to EC2
           "s3:*"              // For OpenTofu state storage
         ],
         "Resource": "*"
       }
     ]
   }
   ```

   This permission set provides:
   - Full EC2 management capabilities
   - S3 access for OpenTofu state files
   - Minimum IAM permissions for EC2 operation
   - Load balancing capabilities if needed

5. **Configure the permission set**:

    - Name: `EC2-OpenTofu-Access`
    - Description: "Permissions for EC2 management and OpenTofu infrastructure deployment"

6. **Complete the creation** and proceed to Step 4 for assignment

#### Step 4: Assign User to Account

1. **Go to "AWS accounts"** in the left sidebar
2. **Select your AWS account**
3. **Click "Assign users or groups"**
4. **Select your user** and the **permission set** you created
5. **Finish the assignment**

#### Step 5: Get Your SSO Information

In Identity Center, find:

- **AWS access portal URL** (something like `https://d-xxxxxxxxxx.awsapps.com/start`)
- **SSO region** (where Identity Center is enabled)

#### Step 6: Configure AWS CLI

Now run:

```bash
aws configure sso
```

You'll be prompted for:

- **SSO session name**: Pick any name (like "personal" or "main")
- **SSO start URL**: Use the access portal URL from step 5
- **SSO region**: The region where Identity Center is set up
- **SSO registration scopes**: Enter `sso:account:access` (this is the default and minimum required scope)
- **Default client region**: Your preferred AWS region for resources
- **Default output format**: `json` (recommended)

The CLI will open a browser for you to authenticate.

#### Step 7: Test It

```bash
aws sso login --profile <sso profile>
```

Even if I granted STS permissions in the json above, I was not able to get the following to work even after successful SSO CLI login

```bash
aws sts get-caller-identity --profile <sso profile>
```

- Create or use existing Access Key ID and Secret Access Key

### Step 8: SSH Credentials

Create an SSH key pair that will allow you to securely connect to the EC2 instance we'll create with OpenTofu.

#### **Generate SSH Key Pair**

```bash
aws ec2 create-key-pair --key-name ec2-key --query 'KeyMaterial' --output text --profile <sso profile> > ec2-key.pem
```

**Note:** Replace `<sso profile>` with the actual profile name you configured during the SSO setup.

#### **Set Key Permissions** (Windows)

This secures the private key file with proper permissions - only your user account can read it. This is required for SSH clients to accept the key.

**In Git Bash/MINGW64:**

```bash
icacls ec2-key.pem /inheritance:r
icacls ec2-key.pem /grant:r "$USERNAME":"(R)"
```

**In PowerShell:**

```powershell
icacls ec2-key.pem /inheritance:r
icacls ec2-key.pem /grant:r "%USERNAME%":"(R)"
```

**Alternative method (works in any terminal):**

```bash
chmod 400 ec2-key.pem
```

## OpenTofu Infrastructure-as-Code

OpenTofu roadmap to get an EC2 instance running:

### Phase 1: Local Setup

1. **Install OpenTofu** on your Windows machine
    [Guide](https://opentofu.org/docs/intro/install/windows/). Not sure if adding it to PATH helped or not

    ```powershell
    winget install --exact --id=OpenTofu.Tofu
    ```

    Restart the terminal, then verify the installation:

    ```bash
    tofu -version
    ```

2. **Create Project Structure**

    Create a subdirectory called `tofu` to keep your configuration files organized:

    ```bash
    mkdir tofu
    cd tofu
    ```

    Inside this directory, create these files:
    - `provider.tf` - AWS provider configuration
    - `main.tf` - EC2 instance definition
    - `variables.tf` - Customizable parameters
    - `outputs.tf` - Output values like IP address
    - `terraform.tfvars` - Your specific variable values

### Phase 2: Write Configuration Files

1. **Provider Configuration (provider.tf)**

    This file configures the AWS provider for OpenTofu, specifying which AWS region to deploy resources in and how to authenticate. It sets up the connection between OpenTofu and your AWS account.

2. **Main Resources (main.tf)**

    The core infrastructure file that defines your AWS resources. For this project, it includes the EC2 instance configuration and a security group that allows SSH access. This is where you define the actual cloud resources you want to create.

3. **Variables (variables.tf)**

    Defines input variables that make your configuration flexible and reusable. This file declares variables like region, AMI ID, instance type, and SSH key name, allowing you to customize your deployment without changing the core resource definitions. **This file is committed to the repository** and contains safe default values.

4. **Outputs (outputs.tf)**

    Specifies values to be displayed after OpenTofu applies your configuration. This file will define outputs like the instance's public IP address and a ready-to-use SSH command, making it easier to connect to your newly created instance.

5. **Custom Values (terraform.tfvars)**

    Contains the specific values for variables defined in variables.tf. This is where you set your preferred region, instance size, SSH key name, and most importantly, your actual public IP address for secure SSH access. **This file is NOT committed to the repository** (excluded by .gitignore) because it contains personalized and potentially sensitive information like your public IP address. You should customize the values in this file to match your specific requirements and security needs.

**Important**: The `terraform.tfvars` file should contain different values from the defaults in `variables.tf`. For example:

- `variables.tf` might have a generic AMI ID and open SSH access (`0.0.0.0/0`)
- `terraform.tfvars` should have the correct AMI for your chosen region and your actual public IP (`x.x.x.x/32`) for secure SSH access

### Security: .gitignore Configuration

This repository includes a `.gitignore` file that prevents sensitive files from being committed to version control. This is crucial for security when working with infrastructure-as-code tools like OpenTofu.

**Files excluded from the repository:**

- `*.tfvars` - Contains your personal configuration values including IP addresses
- `*.tfstate*` - State files that contain all resource details and can include sensitive data
- `*.pem`, `*.key` - SSH private keys
- `.terraform/` - Provider binaries and cached modules
- `*.tfplan` - Plan files that may contain sensitive output

**Why this matters:**

- **Security**: Prevents accidental exposure of your public IP, SSH keys, or AWS resource details
- **Privacy**: Keeps your personal configuration separate from the shared codebase
- **Best Practice**: Follows standard Terraform/OpenTofu security guidelines

**What gets committed:**

- `variables.tf` - Variable definitions with safe defaults
- `main.tf`, `provider.tf`, `outputs.tf` - Infrastructure code
- `README.md` - Documentation

This approach allows you to safely share infrastructure code while keeping sensitive configuration local to your machine.

### Phase 3: Deployment

1. **Initialize OpenTofu**

    Navigate to the `tofu` directory and initialize:

    ```bash
    cd tofu
    tofu init
    ```

    This downloads required providers and modules.

2. **Plan Deployment**

    Preview what will be created:

    ```bash
    tofu plan
    ```

3. **Apply Configuration**

    Create the resources:

    ```bash
    tofu apply
    ```

    Type `yes` when prompted to confirm.

4. **Connect to Your Instance**

    After successful deployment, use the SSH command from the outputs:

    ```bash
    ssh -i ec2-key.pem ec2-user@<public_ip>
    ```

### Phase 4: Cleanup

When you're done experimenting, destroy the resources to avoid unnecessary charges:

```bash
tofu destroy
```

Type `yes` when prompted to confirm.

## Next Steps

Once you're comfortable with this basic setup, you can explore:

- Adding more EC2 configuration options
- Setting up autoscaling groups
- Creating a proper networking setup with VPC and subnets
- Implementing remote state storage in S3
- Adding state locking with DynamoDB

Commit message:

Update README.md to include .terraform.lock.hcl details and add the file for dependency management

README.md, after:

# OpenTofu Hello World on AWS

## Goal

A minimal guide on how to use OpenTofu to provision an EC2 instance on AWS.

## **Set up AWS**

### **AWS CLI**

In your local machine install AWS CLI, my [guide](https://github.com/francisco-camargo/francisco-camargo/blob/master/src/aws/aws_cli/README.md).

Verify with

```bash
aws --version
```

### **IAM Identity Center**

#### Step 1: Complete Identity Center Setup

1. **Enable IAM Identity Center** in your AWS Console
2. **Choose your identity source** - for a personal account, select "Identity Center directory"
3. **Complete any remaining setup steps** AWS shows you

#### Step 2: Create Your User

1. **In Identity Center, go to "Users"** in the left sidebar
2. **Click "Add user"**
3. **Fill in your details**:

    - Username (your choice)
    - Email address
    - First/Last name
    - Set a password or have AWS generate one

4. **Create the user**

#### Step 3: Create a Permission Set

1. **Go to "Permission sets"** in the left sidebar
2. **Click "Create permission set"**
3. **Select permission set type** select "Custom permission set"
4. **Add inline policy**:

   - In the "Permissions" section, locate "Inline policy"
   - Click "Add inline policy"
   - Switch to JSON editor and paste (_you must remove the comments_):

   ```json
   {
     "Version": "2012-10-17",
     "Statement": [
       {
         "Effect": "Allow",
         "Action": [
           "ec2:*",             // For managing EC2 instances
           "elasticloadbalancing:*",  // For potential load balancing
           "iam:CreateServiceLinkedRole",  // For EC2 service roles
           "iam:PassRole",      // For assigning roles to EC2
           "s3:*"              // For OpenTofu state storage
         ],
         "Resource": "*"
       }
     ]
   }
   ```

   This permission set provides:
   - Full EC2 management capabilities
   - S3 access for OpenTofu state files
   - Minimum IAM permissions for EC2 operation
   - Load balancing capabilities if needed

5. **Configure the permission set**:

    - Name: `EC2-OpenTofu-Access`
    - Description: "Permissions for EC2 management and OpenTofu infrastructure deployment"

6. **Complete the creation** and proceed to Step 4 for assignment

#### Step 4: Assign User to Account

1. **Go to "AWS accounts"** in the left sidebar
2. **Select your AWS account**
3. **Click "Assign users or groups"**
4. **Select your user** and the **permission set** you created
5. **Finish the assignment**

#### Step 5: Get Your SSO Information

In Identity Center, find:

- **AWS access portal URL** (something like `https://d-xxxxxxxxxx.awsapps.com/start`)
- **SSO region** (where Identity Center is enabled)

#### Step 6: Configure AWS CLI

Now run:

```bash
aws configure sso
```

You'll be prompted for:

- **SSO session name**: Pick any name (like "personal" or "main")
- **SSO start URL**: Use the access portal URL from step 5
- **SSO region**: The region where Identity Center is set up
- **SSO registration scopes**: Enter `sso:account:access` (this is the default and minimum required scope)
- **Default client region**: Your preferred AWS region for resources
- **Default output format**: `json` (recommended)

The CLI will open a browser for you to authenticate.

#### Step 7: Test It

```bash
aws sso login --profile <sso profile>
```

Even if I granted STS permissions in the json above, I was not able to get the following to work even after successful SSO CLI login

```bash
aws sts get-caller-identity --profile <sso profile>
```

- Create or use existing Access Key ID and Secret Access Key

### Step 8: SSH Credentials

Create an SSH key pair that will allow you to securely connect to the EC2 instance we'll create with OpenTofu.

#### **Generate SSH Key Pair**

```bash
aws ec2 create-key-pair --key-name ec2-key --query 'KeyMaterial' --output text --profile <sso profile> > ec2-key.pem
```

**Note:** Replace `<sso profile>` with the actual profile name you configured during the SSO setup.

#### **Set Key Permissions** (Windows)

This secures the private key file with proper permissions - only your user account can read it. This is required for SSH clients to accept the key.

**In Git Bash/MINGW64:**

```bash
icacls ec2-key.pem /inheritance:r
icacls ec2-key.pem /grant:r "$USERNAME":"(R)"
```

**In PowerShell:**

```powershell
icacls ec2-key.pem /inheritance:r
icacls ec2-key.pem /grant:r "%USERNAME%":"(R)"
```

**Alternative method (works in any terminal):**

```bash
chmod 400 ec2-key.pem
```

## OpenTofu Infrastructure-as-Code

OpenTofu roadmap to get an EC2 instance running:

### Phase 1: Local Setup

1. **Install OpenTofu** on your Windows machine
    [Guide](https://opentofu.org/docs/intro/install/windows/). Not sure if adding it to PATH helped or not

    ```powershell
    winget install --exact --id=OpenTofu.Tofu
    ```

    Restart the terminal, then verify the installation:

    ```bash
    tofu -version
    ```

2. **Create Project Structure**

    Create a subdirectory called `tofu` to keep your configuration files organized:

    ```bash
    mkdir tofu
    cd tofu
    ```

    Inside this directory, create these files:
    - `provider.tf` - AWS provider configuration
    - `main.tf` - EC2 instance definition
    - `variables.tf` - Customizable parameters
    - `outputs.tf` - Output values like IP address
    - `terraform.tfvars` - Your specific variable values

### Phase 2: Write Configuration Files

1. **Provider Configuration (provider.tf)**

    This file configures the AWS provider for OpenTofu, specifying which AWS region to deploy resources in and how to authenticate. It sets up the connection between OpenTofu and your AWS account.

2. **Main Resources (main.tf)**

    The core infrastructure file that defines your AWS resources. For this project, it includes the EC2 instance configuration and a security group that allows SSH access. This is where you define the actual cloud resources you want to create.

3. **Variables (variables.tf)**

    Defines input variables that make your configuration flexible and reusable. This file declares variables like region, AMI ID, instance type, and SSH key name, allowing you to customize your deployment without changing the core resource definitions. **This file is committed to the repository** and contains safe default values.

4. **Outputs (outputs.tf)**

    Specifies values to be displayed after OpenTofu applies your configuration. This file will define outputs like the instance's public IP address and a ready-to-use SSH command, making it easier to connect to your newly created instance.

5. **Custom Values (terraform.tfvars)**

    Contains the specific values for variables defined in variables.tf. This is where you set your preferred region, instance size, SSH key name, and most importantly, your actual public IP address for secure SSH access. **This file is NOT committed to the repository** (excluded by .gitignore) because it contains personalized and potentially sensitive information like your public IP address. You should customize the values in this file to match your specific requirements and security needs.

**Important**: The `terraform.tfvars` file should contain different values from the defaults in `variables.tf`. For example:

- `variables.tf` might have a generic AMI ID and open SSH access (`0.0.0.0/0`)
- `terraform.tfvars` should have the correct AMI for your chosen region and your actual public IP (`x.x.x.x/32`) for secure SSH access

### Security: .gitignore Configuration

This repository includes a `.gitignore` file that prevents sensitive files from being committed to version control. This is crucial for security when working with infrastructure-as-code tools like OpenTofu.

**Files excluded from the repository:**

- `*.tfvars` - Contains your personal configuration values including IP addresses
- `*.tfstate*` - State files that contain all resource details and can include sensitive data
- `*.pem`, `*.key` - SSH private keys
- `.terraform/` - Provider binaries and cached modules
- `*.tfplan` - Plan files that may contain sensitive output

**Why this matters:**

- **Security**: Prevents accidental exposure of your public IP, SSH keys, or AWS resource details
- **Privacy**: Keeps your personal configuration separate from the shared codebase
- **Best Practice**: Follows standard Terraform/OpenTofu security guidelines

**What gets committed:**

- `variables.tf` - Variable definitions with safe defaults
- `main.tf`, `provider.tf`, `outputs.tf` - Infrastructure code
- `README.md` - Documentation
- `.terraform.lock.hcl` - Dependency lock file (contains version info, no sensitive data)

This approach allows you to safely share infrastructure code while keeping sensitive configuration local to your machine.

**Note about .terraform.lock.hcl:** This file should be committed as it ensures all team members use the same provider versions, improving consistency and reproducibility. It contains only version numbers and checksums, no sensitive information.

### Phase 3: Deployment

1. **Initialize OpenTofu**

    Navigate to the `tofu` directory and initialize:

    ```bash
    cd tofu
    tofu init
    ```

    This downloads required providers and modules.

2. **Plan Deployment**

    Preview what will be created:

    ```bash
    tofu plan
    ```

3. **Apply Configuration**

    Create the resources:

    ```bash
    tofu apply
    ```

    Type `yes` when prompted to confirm.

4. **Connect to Your Instance**

    After successful deployment, use the SSH command from the outputs:

    ```bash
    ssh -i ec2-key.pem ec2-user@<public_ip>
    ```

### Phase 4: Cleanup

When you're done experimenting, destroy the resources to avoid unnecessary charges:

```bash
tofu destroy
```

Type `yes` when prompted to confirm.

## Next Steps

Once you're comfortable with this basic setup, you can explore:

- Adding more EC2 configuration options
- Setting up autoscaling groups
- Creating a proper networking setup with VPC and subnets
- Implementing remote state storage in S3
- Adding state locking with DynamoDB
